>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, APRIL 24...
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND GERMAN
CHANCELLOR MERKEL SEEK COMMON
GROUND ON TRADE, MIGRANTS, AND
FIGHTING TERRORISM.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, TWO
YEARS AFTER THE REVOLUTION, THE
STRUGGLE FOR POLITICAL CHANGE
AND STABILITY IN UKRAINE.
>> (translated): WE HAVE A
SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY, WHEN
MORE PEOPLE BEGAN TO THINK THAT
THEY'D RATHER LEAVE THAN TRY TO
FIX THE PROBLEMS HERE.
>> Thompson: AND, A PREVIEW OF
TUESDAY'S PRESIDENTIAL
PRIMARIES.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS PUSHING THE
PROPOSED TRANSATLANTIC TRADE AND
INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP HE HOPES
TO FINALIZE BY THE END OF THE
YEAR.
THE PRESIDENT WAS IN GERMANY
TODAY FOR TALKS WITH CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL ABOUT THE DEAL,
WHICH IS INTENDED TO LOWER THE
COSTS AND REGULATIONS OF IMPORTS
AND EXPORTS BETWEEN THE U.S. AND
EUROPE.
AT A NEWS CONFERENCE WITH
MERKEL, OBAMA SAID BOTH NATIONS
BENEFIT FROM FREE TRADE.
>> IT IS INDISPUTABLE THAT IT
HAS MADE OUR ECONOMY STRONGER.
IT HAS MADE SURE THAT OUR
BUSINESSES ARE THE MOST
COMPETITIVE IN THE WORLD, AND AS
YOU SEE OTHER MARKETS LIKE CHINA
BEGINNING TO DEVELOP, AND ASIA
BEGINNING TO DEVELOP, AND AFRICA
GROWING FAST, WE'VE GOT TO MAKE
SURE OUR BUSINESSES CAN COMPETE
THERE.
>> Thompson: THE PRESIDENT ALSO
PRAISED MERKEL FOR BEING, AS HE
PUT IT, "ON THE RIGHT SIDE OF
HISTORY," FOR ACCEPTING A
MILLION REFUGEES FROM SYRIA AND
ELSEWHERE IN THE PAST YEAR.
TOMORROW, OBAMA AND MERKEL WILL
HOLD TALKS WITH OTHER EUROPEAN
LEADERS ON SECURITY
COOPERATION...FOLLOWING THE
ATTACKS BY ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS IN BRUSSELS AND PARIS.
IN GERMANY, PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID
NORTH KOREA ENGAGED IN
"PROVOCATIVE BEHAVIOR" BY
TESTING A SUBMARINE-LAUNCHED
BALLISTIC MISSILE YESTERDAY.
THE PRESIDENT ALSO SAID HE
DOESN'T TAKE SERIOUSLY THE
NORTH'S OFFER TO HALT NUCLEAR
TESTING IF THE U.S. WERE TO HALT
ONGOING MILITARY EXERCISES WITH
SOUTH KOREA.
NORTH KOREA TODAY RELEASED
PICTURES IT SAID SHOWED LEADER
KIM JONG UN WATCHING THE LAUNCH
OF THE MISSILE FLYING INTO THE
AIR FROM UNDERWATER.
NORTH KOREA CALLED THE TEST A,
QUOTE, "GREAT SUCCESS."
FIVE NORTHEAST STATES HOLD
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARIES TUESDAY:
PENNSYLVANIA, MARYLAND,
CONNECTICUT, RHODE ISLAND, AND
DELAWARE.
HILLARY CLINTON TOLD A
PREDOMINANTLY BLACK CHURCH IN
PHILADELPHIA TODAY SHE'LL FIGHT
FOR EVERY CHILD TO LIVE UP TO
HIS OR HER "GOD-GIVEN"
POTENTIAL.
BERNIE SANDERS TOLD SUPPORTERS
IN RHODE ISLAND HE WANTS A TAX
ON CARBON EMISSIONS TO REDUCE
GLOBAL WARMING.
DONALD TRUMP RALLIED SUPPORTERS
IN MARYLAND TODAY; WHILE TED
CRUZ VISITED INDIANA, WHICH
VOTES MAY 3RD.
OF THE FIVE STATES HOLDING
PRIMARIES TUESDAY, PENNSYLVANIA
IS THE BIGGEST PRIZE -- WITH 71
NATIONAL CONVENTION DELEGATES AT
STAKE FOR REPUBLICANS AND 210
DELEGATES FOR THE DEMOCRATS.
IN AN NBC NEWS-WALL STREET
JOURNAL-POLL RELEASED TODAY,
DONALD TRUMP IS FAVORED BY 45%
OF LIKELY REPUBLICAN VOTERS, AND
HILLARY CLINTON IS FAVORED BY
55% OF LIKELY DEMOCRATIC VOTERS.
FOR MORE ON THE BATTLE FOR
PENNSYLVANIA, I AM JOINED FROM
PHILADELPHIA BY JONATHAN TAMARI,
A POLITICAL REPORTER WITH "THE
PHILADELPHIA ENQUIRER."
SO I FIRST JUST WANTED TO START
OUT BY TALKING ABOUT THE
REPUBLICAN RACE.
WE'VE GOT DONALD TRUMP.
WE'VE GOT A CONSERVATIVE SENATOR
IN CRUZ AND THEN WE'VE GOT JOHN
KASICH WHO IS THE GOVERNOR OF
THE STATE RIGHT NEXT DOOR TO
PENNSYLVANIA, OHIO.
SO CAN YOU JUST TALK TO US A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THE STATE
OF PLAY.
>> FOR THE STATE OF PLAY IS THAT
DONALD TRUMP AS YOU JUST RECITED
ON THAT POLL IS FAR AHEAD SO
FAR AND HIM AND TED CRUZ ARE
REALLY COMPETING IN A LOT OF THE
SAME AREAS, THE SO CALLED TEA
OF THE T OF PENNSYLVANIA FROM
THE TOP OF THE STATE AND DOWN
THROUGH THE CENTER IN BETWEEN
PHILADELPHIA AND PITTSBURGH.
THIS IS REALLY WHERE THE
CONSERVATIVE HEART OF
PENNSYLVANIA IS.
FOR KASICH, AFTER HE WON OHIO,
THERE WAS A LOT OF TALK THAT
MAYBE PENNSYLVANIA WOULD BE THE
NEXT BIG PLACE THAT HE WOULD
REALLY MAKE A STRONG STAND AND
TRY TO WIN A PRIMARY.
AND A LOT OF THE ESTABLISHMENT
HERE HAVE LINED UP WITH HIM.
BUT IT HAS NOT BEEN REFLECTED IN
THE POLLING.
>> CAN YOU TALK TO ME A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT HOW THE REPUBLICANS
ALLOCATE THEIR DELEGATES FOR THE
CONVENTION.
I UNDERSTAND THAT TUESDAY'S
PRIMARY MIGHT NOT ACTUALLY
DECIDE WHO THEY VOTE FOR.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE ARE 71 DELEGATES IN THE
STATE BUT ONLY 17 OF THEM ARE
ACTUALLY GOING TO GO TO THE
PERSON WHO WINS STATEWIDE.
THE OTHER 54 WILL BE UNBOUND
WHEN THEY HEAD TO THE CONVENTION
IN CLEVELAND WHICH MEANS THEY
COULD VOTE FOR ANYBODY THEY
WANT.
AND SO THE SUBPLOT TO ALL THIS
ASIDE FROM WHO WINS THE BIG
HEADLINE OF WINNING THE STATE IS
WHO GETS THEIR DELEGATES
ELECTED.
THE DELEGATES WILL BE CHOSEN BY
THE VOTERS BY CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICT.
CRUZ AND TRUMP EACH HAVE THEIR
OWN LOYALISTS.
THE PARTY ESTABLISHMENT HAS A
NUMBER OF CANDIDATES ON THE
BALLOT, THEY WANT SOMEONE
WITHOUT IS ELECTABLE WHICH
REALLY POINTS TO JOHN KASICH.
SO THIS SAY LOW INFORMATION
ELECTION THAT ALL THE CANDIDATES
ARE TRYING TO EDUCATE THEIR
VOTERS ABOUT, TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEIR DELEGATES GET CHOSEN AND
THEN STAY LOYAL TO THEM IN THE
MONTHS BETWEEN NOW AND THE
CONVENTION IN CLEVELAND.
>> ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE,
HILLARY CLINTON BEAT BARACK
OBAMA BACK IN 2008 AND SHE'S GOT
A STRONG LEAD IN THE POLLS BUT
EVEN STILL HOW IS SHE SEPARATING
HERSELF FROM BERNIE SANDERS ON
THE ISSUE.
>> THE MAIN ISSUE SHE HAS BEEN
FOCUSING ON, AN SHE HAS BEEN
TOURING THIS MORNING, EVEN,
AFRICAN-AMERICAN CHURCHES.
AND SHE IS TALKING A LOT ABOUT
GUN VIOLENCE WHICH WE KNOW SHE
IS SOMETHING THAT SHE A HAS BEEN
CRITICAL OF SENATOR SANDERS ON
NOT BEING STRONG ENOUGH ON GUN
LAWS.
AN EVEN IN A LOCAL ASPECT SHE
IS IN FAVOR, THERE IS A BIG
DEBATE IN PHILADELPHIA RIGHT NOW
OVER A TAX ON SUGARY DRINK, THE
SO CALLED SODA TAX.
SHE HAS COME OUT AS IN FAVOR AS
A WAY TO FUND PRESCHOOL.
SENATOR SANDERS IS OPPOSED
SAYING IT WOULD EXACERBATE
INEQUALITIES.
BUT CLINTON HAS REALLY DEEP TIES
TO PENNSYLVANIA AND IS LEADING
PRETTY MUCH ACROSS-THE-BOARD
EXCEPT AMONG YOUNGER VOTERS.
>> JONATHAN TAMARI OF THE
PHILADELPHIA ENQUIRER, THANK YOU
SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> Thompson: TODAY, NEPAL IS
MARKING ONE YEAR SINCE A
DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE KILLED 9-
THOUSAND PEOPLE AND DESTROYED
600-THOUSAND HOMES.
THE COUNTRY'S PRIME MINISTER LED
A MEMORIAL TODAY AT WHAT REMAINS
OF A 185-YEAR-OLD TOWER IN THE
CAPITAL, KATHMANDU: THE TOWER
COLLAPSED DURING THE QUAKE LAST
APRIL 25TH.
OUTSIDE THE PRIME MINISTER'S
OFFICE, ABOUT 100 PEOPLE
PROTESTING THE SLOW PACE OF
RECONSTRUCTION, SCUFFLED WITH
POLICE.
MILLIONS OF NEPALESE ARE LIVING
IN TEMPORARY SHELTERS, AND THE
RED CROSS SAYS MORE THAN A
BILLION DOLLARS IN AID REMAINS
UNSPENT.
>> LEARN HOW THE PUBLIC
DEFENDER'S OFFICE IN SAN
FRANCISCO IS FIGHTING RACIAL
DISPARITIES IN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM BY CONTESTING
BAIL FOR HUNDREDS OF CLIENTS.
READ OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Thompson: IN THE EASTERN
EUROPEAN COUNTRY OF UKRAINE,
IT'S BEEN MORE THAN TWO YEARS
SINCE VIOLENT PROTESTS DROVE A
PRESIDENT FROM OFFICE.
SINCE THEN, THE FORMER SOVIET
REPUBLIC HAS FACED MANY
CHALLENGES, NOT THE LEAST OF
WHICH WAS WHEN ITS POWERFUL
NEIGHBOR, RUSSIA, OCCUPIED
UKRAINE'S CRIMEAN PENINSULA--
SPARKING A MILITARY CONFLICT
BETWEEN PRO-RUSSIAN
SECESSIONISTS AND UKRAINE'S
GOVERNMENT.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY AND
PRODUCER JASON MALONEY, FROM THE
BUREAU FOR INTERNATIONAL
REPORTING, TAKE US INSIDE
UKRAINE TO ASSESS THE COUNTRY'S
STRUGGLE FOR POLITICAL CHANGE
AND STABILITY.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST TWO
YEARS, A NEW POLITICAL MOVEMENT
HAS EMERGED IN UKRAINE.
A COALITION OF FORMER ACTIVISTS,
ANALYSTS AND JOURNALISTS THAT
NOW HOLDS 27 SEATS IN THE
NATION'S 450 SEAT PARLIAMENT, AN
INSTITUTION NOTORIOUS FOR THE
INFLUENCE OF THE COUNTRY'S MEGA-
RICH BUSINESSMEN, KNOWN AS "THE
OLIGARCHS."
ONE OF THESE NEW ARRIVALS IS
SVITLANA ZALISHCHUK.
>> (translated): WE WOULD LIKE
TO JOIN EUROPEAN COMMUNITY, NOT
JUST WITH THE DECLARATIONS BUT
WITH THE REAL REFORMS INSIDE OF
THE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: ZALISHCHUK WORKS
CLOSELY WITH HER LONGTIME
FRIENDS, SERGII LESHCHENKO AND
MUSTAFA NAYYEM.
THEY WERE ALL ELECTED IN 2014,
EIGHT MONTHS AFTER LEADING
PROTESTS NOW KNOWN AS THE EURO-
MAIDAN REVOLUTION FOR KIEV'S
MAIN SQUARE, THE MAIDAN.
DEMONSTRATORS FAVORED CLOSER
TIES WITH WESTERN EUROPE AND
LESS ALIGNMENT WITH RUSSIA.
TODAY, THESE REFORMERS CALL
THEMSELVES THE "EURO-OPTIMISTS."
>>9 TO BE AN OPTIMIST IN
UKRAINE, IT'S A BIG CHALLENGE.
BECAUSE TOO MANY YEARS WE'VE
SPENT IN THIS PROCESS OF
TRANSFORMATION.
AND I STILL BELIEVE THE WORK IS
NOT FINISHED.
>> THIS IS A VERY HOSTILE
ENVIRONMENT.
WHEN YOU FEEL THAT THE
CORRUPTION AND THE OLD STYLE
POLITICIANS AND THE OLD STYLE OF
MAKING POLICY, IS VERY CLOSE TO
YOU.
THIS IS BIG COMPROMISES FOR US.
IT WAS VERY EASY TO BE HEROES ON
THE MAIDAN AND IT IS MUCH MORE
DIFFICULT TO BE HEROES HERE IN
THE PARLIAMENT.
>> Reporter: NAYYEM SPARKED THE
EURO-MAIDAN PROTESTS IN NOVEMBER
2013 WITH A FACEBOOK POST,
ASKING PEOPLE TO COME OUT
AGAINST THEN-PRESIDENT VIKTOR
YANUKOVYCH.
YANUKOVYCH HAD JUST SCUTTLED A
FREE TRADE AND COOPERATION
AGREEMENT WITH THE EUROPEAN
UNION-- UNDER PRESSURE FROM HIS
ALLY, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN.
PROTESTERS ALSO DEMANDED AN END
TO THE COUNTRY'S ENDEMIC
CORRUPTION.
THEY OCCUPIED THE MAIDAN FOR
THREE MONTHS.
POLICE BEAT PROTESTERS ON THE
STREETS AND FIRED INTO THE
CROWDS.
MORE THAN 100 PEOPLE DIED.
BUT THE DEMONSTRATIONS FORCED
PRESIDENT YANUKOVYCH INTO EXILE
IN RUSSIA.
THREE MONTHS LATER, UKRAINE
ELECTED A NEW PRESIDENT, PETRO
POROSHENKO.
HE WAS REGARDED AS AN OLIGARCH
BUT RAN AS A REFORMER.
IN THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
THAT FOLLOWED, THE EURO-
OPTIMISTS CAME INTO OFFICE.
>> IT WAS ABOUT THE IDENTITY--
IDENTITY OF WHAT COUNTRY YOU
WOULD LIKE TO BUILD FOR THE NEXT
GENERATION.
AND WE DECIDED THAT WE WANT A
DEMOCRATIC COUNTRY.
TO HAVE JUSTICE IN THE COURT, TO
HAVE TO HAVE POLICE, NOT AS A
REPRESSIVE MACHINE BUT RATHER AS
AN INSTITUTION WHO PROTECTS YOUR
RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS."
>> Reporter: BUT EVEN BEFORE THE
NEW UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT TOOK
OFFICE, RUSSIA, ANGERED BY THE
OUSTER OF THE PRO-RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT, SENT TROOPS INTO
UKRAINE'S SOUTHERN PROVINCE OF
CRIMEA, AND ANNEXED IT.
THE ARRIVAL OF RUSSIAN TROOPS
EMBOLDENED PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS IN THE EAST OF THE
COUNTRY, WHO WANTED TO SECEDE
FROM UKRAINE.
MORE THAN 9,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
AND FIGHTING CONTINUES TO FLARE,
DESPITE A CEASEFIRE.
THOUSANDS OF UKRAINIAN CITIZENS
VOLUNTEERED TO FIGHT THE
SEPARATISTS IN THE EAST.
NOW UKRAINE GRAPPLES WITH RE-
INTEGRATING THOSE VETERANS, MANY
BEARING THE SCARS AND WOUNDS OF
WAR, INTO DAILY LIFE IN THE
MIDST OF A DEPRESSED ECONOMY
WHERE JOBS ARE TIGHT.
BUT THE BIGGEST STRAIN ON
SOCIETY ARE THE ALMOST TWO
MILLION PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
DRIVEN OUT OF OCCUPIED CRIMEA
AND THE EASTERN WAR ZONE.
IN A SOVIET-ERA DORMITORY THAT
ONCE HOUSED TRANSIT WORKERS
OUTSIDE KIEV, PEOPLE LIKE
LYUDMILA PISHTOY LIVE IN TINY
QUARTERS.
>> (translated): HERE'S OUR
KITCHEN AND OUR BEDROOM.
THIS IS HOW WE LIVE.
WE ARE THANKFUL FOR THIS, OF
COURSE.
WE WANT TO GO HOME, BUT THE
ROADS ARE CLOSED TO US.
>> Reporter: OKSANA BUDNIK FLED
CRIMEA WITH HER HUSBAND AND TWO
CHILDREN.
A FLORIST BACK HOME, SHE HASN'T
BEEN ALLOWED TO TRANSFER FUNDS
FROM HER OLD BANK ACCOUNT.
>> (translated): THEY SAID I
COULD RE-REGISTER MY BUSINESS
HERE, BUT TO DO SO I NEED ACCESS
TO MY MONEY.
SO NEITHER MY HUSBAND NOR I CAN
OFFICIALLY WORK.
THE RESIDENTS SAY THEIR 35
DOLLAR A MONTH GOVERNMENT
STIPEND DOESN'T COVER EVEN THEIR
RENT, SO THEY GET BY WITH THE
HELP OF A CANADIAN AID GROUP.
18-YEAR-OLD AARON ROKROBSKIY
SAYS PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS
DETAINED HIM, BUT HE ESCAPED AND
FLED WITH HIS FATHER. HIS MOTHER
REFUSED TO LEAVE.
>> (translated): SHE CALLED
US, IN TEARS AND SCREAMING.
OUR HOUSE WAS BOMBED-- ALL THE
WINDOWS AND DOORS WERE BLOWN
OUT.
THE NEXT DAY I WENT BACK TO GET
HER OUT OF THERE.
>> Reporter: GEOFFREY PYATT IS
THE UNITED STATES AMBASSADOR TO
UKRAINE.
>> EVEN TODAY THERE ARE RUSSIAN
TROOPS ON THE GROUND LEADING
SEPARATIST FORCES THAT ARE DOING
EVERYTHING THEY CAN TO DEFEAT
THE NEW UKRAINE.
>> Reporter : PYATT HAS LED THE
AMERICAN SUPPORT EFFORT HERE,
WHICH INCLUDES TRAINING
UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS AND HELPING
REFORM LONG-CORRUPT
INSTITUTIONS.
>> THE WAY UKRAINE DEFEATS
VLADIMIR PUTIN IS BY BUILDING A
MODERN DEMOCRATIC EUROPEAN
STATE.
THE MORE UKRAINE CONSOLIDATES
REFORM, THE MORE UKRAINE
DEMONSTRATES THAT IT'S NOT GOING
TO BE DISSUADED FROM ITS
EUROPEAN CHOICE, AND THE
STANDARDS AND VALUES AND
INSTITUTIONS THAT COME WITH
THAT, THE HARDER IT IS FOR THE
KREMLIN TO TRY TO DEFEAT THAT
MILITARILY.
Reporter: PYATT POINTS TO
FLEDGLING ECONOMIC REFORMS, SUCH
AS THE CLOSURES OF INSOLVENT
BANKS AND THE ENDING OF LONG
TIME ENERGY PRICE CUTS THAT
WEAKENED THE STATE BUDGET.
BY INCREASING ENERGY SUPPLIES
FROM EUROPE, UKRAINE HAS
DRAMATICALLY REDUCED ITS
DEPENDENCE ON RUSSIAN NATURAL
GAS.
>> THIS IS NOT A POOR COUNTRY
THIS A COUNTRY WITH AN ENORMOUS
ENDOWMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES,
THE BEST AGRICULTURAL LAND IN
THE WORLD, TREMENDOUS HUMAN
RESOURCES.
WHAT IT HAS ALWAYS SUFFERED FROM
IS JUST ATROCIOUS GOVERNANCE.
>> Reporter: THE NEW PARLIAMENT
HAS PASSED LAWS TO ENABLE
INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS TO BEGIN.
A SHOWPIECE IS THE REBUILDING OF
THE COUNTRY'S POLICE FORCE, ONCE
A TOOL OF STATE REPRESSION AND
VIOLENCE.
TEN THOUSAND RECRUITS HAVE BEEN
TRAINED IN CITIES ALL OVER
UKRAINE.
THEY COME FROM ALL WALKS OF
LIFE:
>>(translated):
"PEDIATRICIAN."
>> (translated): "LAWYER."
>> (translated): "ECONOMIST."
>> (translated):
"PSYCHOLOGIST."
>> (translated): "FOR 15 YEARS
I RAN A BANK."
>> Reporter: FOR EIGHT WEEKS,
THE RECRUITS DRILL ON THE
SHOOTING RANGE, LEARN HOW TO
MAKE ARRESTS, AND STUDY
CRIMINOLOGY.
WHILE CRITICS CHARGE THE POLICE
UPPER RANKS CONTAIN HOLDOVERS
FROM THE OLD REGIME, THERE IS A
TRUE SENSE OF "STARTING OVER"
AMONG THIS CORPS.
>> (translated): WE HAVE A
SITUATION UKRAINE, WHERE MORE
PEOPLE BEGAN TO THINK THAT
THEY'D RATHER LEAVE THAN TRY TO
FIX THE PROBLEMS HERE.
AND I DON'T WANT TO LEAVE MY
COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: THERE'S ALSO A NEW
NATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION BUREAU
TO INVESTIGATE GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS, JUDGES, AND THE
COUNTRY'S MEGA-RICH OLIGARCHS.
IT'S BEING TRAINED BY THE FBI IN
DATA COLLECTION.
THE ANTI-CORRUPTION BUREAU'S
SPECIAL FORCES UNIT IS VITAL,
SAYS DIRECTOR ARTEM SYTNYK.
>> (translated): THE
RESISTANCE OF THE OLD CORRUPT
SYSTEM IS SO GREAT THAT
SOMETIMES WE HAVE TO USE FORCE.
EVEN DURING A SIMPLE
INVESTIGATION, SEARCHES,
ARRESTS, OUR DETECTIVES ARE
CONFRONTED WITH ARMED
RESISTANCE, WITH DOZENS OF
BODYGUARDS THAT PROTECT HIGH-
RANKING OFFICIALS.
>> Reporter: SYTNYK SAYS
FIGHTING CORRUPTION IS AS
IMPORTANT AS THE WAR IN THE
EAST, BUT ENTRENCHED INTERESTS
DON'T WANT HIM TO SUCCEED.
>> (translated): CORRUPTION IS
ACTUALLY A LIFESTYLE FOR MANY
OFFICIALS AND CITIZENS IN
UKRAINE.
WE ARE ONLY AT THE BEGINNING OF
THIS STRUGGLE. WE HAVE NO FAIR
AND INDEPENDENT COURTS, THE
BASIS OF DEMOCRACY.
WE HAVE HUGE CORRUPTION RISKS IN
OUR ECONOMY, WHICH PREVENTS
DEVELOPMENT OF THE MARKET
ECONOMY, OF FAIR COMPETITION.
>> Reporter: FORMER PRESIDENT
YANUKOVYCH AND HIS CRONIES ARE
WIDELY BELIEVED TO HAVE LOOTED
TENS OF BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FROM
THE STATE TREASURY, BUT
UKRAINIAN PROSECUTORS HAVE NOT
FILED CRIMINAL CHARGES.
THE NEW GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO
FAILED TO HOLD ANYONE
ACCOUNTABLE FOR THE DEATHS IN
THE EURO-MAIDAN PROTESTS.
INNA PLEKHANOVA'S SON, SASHA, A
22-YEAR-OLD BUDDING ARCHITECT,
WAS KILLED IN A STANDOFF BETWEEN
PROTESTERS AND POLICE.
>> (translated): IT WAS A
GUNSHOT WOUND TO THE HEAD.
IT WAS MEANT TO BE DEADLY.
THEY WERE SHOOTING TO KILL.
>> Reporter: PLEKHANOVA HAS BEEN
WAITING MORE THAN TWO YEARS FOR
JUSTICE.
>> (translated): I THOUGHT IT
WOULD BE POSSIBLE TO AT LEAST
DETERMINE THE SUSPECTS AFTER TWO
YEARS.
IT'S ONE THING IF THEY CAN'T BE
FOUND, AS MANY FLED TO RUSSIA.
BUT TO DETERMINE WHO THE ACTORS
WERE IS POSSIBLE, AS IT WAS ALL
FILMED ON CAMERA.
>> Reporter: PLEKHANOVA'S
LAWYER, PAVLO DYKAN, SAYS A NEW
PROSECUTION UNIT HAS BEEN
CREATED TO INVESTIGATE PROTEST
DEATHS BUT FACES OBSTRUCTION
FROM ABOVE.
>> (translated):
UNFORTUNATELY, THIS CASE IS A
VIVID ILLUSTRATION OF THE FACT
THAT REFORM HASN'T HAPPENED. WE
STILL SEE ALL THE SAME PEOPLE
WHO WERE "ON THE DARK SIDE"
DURING THE MAIDAN THOSE IN
CHARGE OF ILLEGAL DETENTIONS AND
INFORMATION GATHERING ON
ACTIVISTS.
AND OF COURSE IT IS FOOLISH TO
EXPECT THAT THESE PEOPLE WILL
TESTIFY OR HELP INVESTIGATE
THEIR OWN CRIMES.
>> Reporter: SVITLANA ZALISHCHUK
AND HER EURO-OPTIMIST COLLEAGUES
IN UKRAINE'S PARLIAMENT KNOW
THAT MAKING LASTING CHANGE WON'T
BE EASY.
>> THERE IS BIG STRUGGLE.
THERE IS BIG FIGHT BETWEEN THE
OLD AND THE NEW SYSTEM, OLD AND
NEW APPROACHES.
>> Reporter: THE RECENTLY LEAKED
"PANAMA PAPERS" REVEALED THAT
PRESIDENT POROSHENKO SEEMS TO
HAVE HIDDEN ASSETS IN OFFSHORE
BANK ACCOUNTS, UNDERMINING HIS
IMAGE AS A REFORMER.
AND THE PRIME MINISTER JUST
RESIGNED, AMID NEWS THAT HE'S
UNDER INVESTIGATION FOR
ALLEGEDLY ACCEPTING A THREE
MILLION DOLLAR BRIBE.
THE PATIENCE OF THE UNITED
STATES AND THE EUROPEAN UNION,
WHICH HAVE CONTRIBUTED BILLIONS
IN AID, IS WEARING THIN.
>> THE SUPPORT THAT UKRAINE HAS
ENJOYED HAS BEEN UNPRECEDENTED.
THEY NEED TO CAPITALIZE ON THIS
OPPORTUNITY.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF FAILURE ARE
IMPORTANT BECAUSE OF HOW THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY WOULD
REACT BUT MUCH MORE IMPORTANTLY
HOW UKRAINIANS THEMSELVES REACT.
>> Thompson: SAUDI ARABIA IS THE
WORLD'S NUMBER TWO OIL PRODUCER,
BEHIND THE U.S., AND HAS THE
SECOND LARGEST OIL RESERVES,
AFTER VENEZUELA.
BUT A SLUMP IN GLOBAL OIL PRICES
HAS SAUDI ARABIA RE-THINKING ITS
NEAR TOTAL DEPENDENCE ON OIL
REVENUE.
TOMORROW, THE MONARCHY IS
EXPECTED TO UNVEIL A NEW VISION
FOR ECONOMIC, AND POSSIBLY
POLITICAL REFORM.
JOINING ME HERE TO DISCUSS THAT
IS DAVID ROTHKOPF, THE EDITOR OF
"FOREIGN POLICY" MAGAZINE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR BEING
HERE.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> SO HOW IS IT THAT SAUDI
ARABIA MIGHT BE PLANNING TO WEAN
ITSELF OFF ITS NEAR TOTAL
DEPENDENCE ON OIL REVENUES?
WHAT DO WE EXPECT MIGHT BE
UNVEILED TOMORROW.
>> I THINK THEY'RE FOLLOWING THE
LEAD OF SOME OF THEIR NEIGHBORS.
A YEAR AGO THE UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES ANNOUNCED A PLAN TO
MOVE OFF OF OIL.
THEY HAD BEEN ACTUALLY ON THIS
TRACK FOR SOME TIME.
I THINK THEY'VE GOTTEN THEIR
ECONOMY DOWN TO LESS THAN 30%
DEPENDENT ON OIL AND ARE
HEADING FOR EVEN LOWER.
WHY?
BECAUSE WHEN YOU'RE DEPENDENT
ON OIL YOU'RE VULNERABLE TO
OIL MARKETS.
AND THE SAUDIS FELT THIS VERY
MUCH LAST YEAR.
IT PRODUCED-- FALLING OIL PRICES
PRODUCED A HUGE DEFICIT, REALLY
SQUEEZE THE ECONOMY AND REDUCED
THEIR LEVERAGE IN A NUMBER OF
OTHER WAYS.
>> DO WE KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT THE
SPECIFIC STEPS THEY'RE GOING TO
TAKE ECONOMICALLY?
>> WE'VE SEEN SOME INDICATIONS
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO MOVE AWAY
FROM SUBSIDIES AS THEY'VE DOB
FOR GASOLINE.
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO MOVE
TOWARDS DIVERSIFICATION OF THE
ECONOMY, SUPPORTING OTHER
INDUSTRIES.
MAY ALSO SEE CERTAIN KINDS OF
POLITICAL AND SOCIAL REFORMS.
THE SON OF THE KING JUST
ADMITTED IN BLOOMBERG BUSINESS
WEEK INTERVIEW IN I WITH HE
TALKED ABOUT HOW IN THE DAY OF
MOHAMMED, WOMEN HAD THE RIGHT TO
RIDE A CAMEL SO WHY WOULDN'T IT
BE THAT THEY HAD THE RIGHT TO
DRIVE A CAR.
THAT MAY SEEM COMMON SENSICAL
BUT IT CERTAINLY IS A DEPARTURE
FROM THE POLICIES OF THE PAST.
>> CAN YOU TALK MORE ABOUT
PRINCE MOHAMMED WHAT IS HIS
REPUTATION AND HOW DID YOU THINK
REFORMS ARE GOING TO BE TAKEN
PUBLICLY?
>> HIS REPUTATION IS GROWING.
YOU KNOW, WHEN HIS TEAR CAME IN
IT WAS LIKE WELL, WHO IS THIS
KID AND WHAT'S GOING ON.
BUT BEHIND THE SCENES HE HAD
BEEN A BIG PLAYER AND HAD A
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE PRIOR KING
AND IT REALLY TRIED TO VOICE HIS
INFLUENCE WHICH PRODUCED SOME
RESENTMENT.
BUT NOW THAT HE'S IN POWER, HE
HAS WON A GREAT DEAL OF RESPECT.
AND IN FACT ONE OF THE MOST
RELIABLE DIPLOMATS I KNOW IN THE
REGION SAID TO ME YESTERDAY
AFTER HAVING SPENT SOME TIME
WITH HIM, THAT HE IS THE REAL
DEAL.
THAT THIS IS A SERIOUS PERSON
WITH A SERIOUS AGENDA.
REAL INFLUENCE AND THE ABLE TO
GET THINGS DONE.
>> HAS SAUDI ARABIA'S
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE UNITED
STATES AFFECTED THIS PUSH FOR
REFORM?
>> YOU CAN TELL WHEN YOU TALK TO
SAUDI LEADERS THAT THEY'RE
LOOKING AT THEIR WATCHES.
THEY'RE WAITING FOR NOVEMBER.
THEY WANT TO BE DONE WITH THIS
BECAUSE THEY REALLY SEE THE
PRIME AERO BAMA POLICY IN THE
MIDDLE EAST OVER THE COURSE OF
THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS BEING A
SHIFT FROM THE TRADITIONAL
PARTNERSHIP WITH SAUDI ARABIA
AND THE GULF TOWARDS AN OPENING
TO IRAN.
IRAN IS THE SAUDI, RIVAL OF
RIVALS.
THIS HAS BEEN PAINFUL FOR THEM.
THEY DON'T LIKE THE OBAMA
POLICIES.
THEY HOPE THAT A NEW
ADMINISTRATION, PERHAPS THE
HILLARY CLINTON ADMINISTRATION
MAY BE A LITTLE BIT MORE
BALANCED IN THEIR VIEWS THAN THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS BEEN.
BUT I THINK THEY'RE ALSO FEELING
THE SQUEEZE.
BECAUSE BOTH FROM THE U.S. AND
FROM EUROPE THE POLICIES THAT
THEY'VE HAD, SOME OF THEIR PAST
SUPPORT FOR UNSAVORY CHARACTERS,
THEIR JUSTICE SYSTEM AS YOU
MENTIONED EARLIER, THEIR VIEWS
TOWARDS WOMEN HAD REALLY MADE
THEM AN OUTLIER.
AND I THINK THAT IF THEY WISH TO
BECOME THE LEADER IN THE REGION,
THEY'RE GOING TO NEED TO MAKE
SOME OF THESE CHANGES HAPPEN ON
A SOCIAL LEVEL AND NOT JUST ON
AN ENERGY POLICY LEVEL.
>> ALL RIGHT, DAVID ROTHKOPF.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR BEING
HERE.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, SUNDAY.
>> Thompson: TUESDAY MARKS 30
YEARS SINCE THE WORLD'S WORST
NUCLEAR POWER PLANT DISASTER,
THE EXPLOSION AT CHERNOBYL, IN
UKRAINE; ON APRIL 26, 1986.
THE ACCIDENT RELEASED AN
ESTIMATED TEN TONS OF
RADIOACTIVE PARTICLES INTO THE
ATMOSPHERE THAT SPREAD ACROSS
THE FORMER SOVIET UNION AND
EUROPE.
SINCE THEN, IT TURNS OUT, PEOPLE
WHO REMAINED IN THE REGION MAY
HAVE BEEN EATING FOOD WITH
RADIATION LEVELS TWO TO FIVE
TIMES HIGHER THAN WHAT IS
CONSIDERED SAFE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE DISASTER FORCED
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS
AROUND CHERNOBYL TO FLEE AND
NEVER COME BACK.
BUT MANY OTHER PEOPLE REMAINED
IN A ZONE THAT WAS CONSIDERED
SAFE ENOUGH DISTANCE TO STAY.
IN THE VILLAGE OF ZALYSHANY,
ABOUT 32 MILES SOUTHWEST OF
CHERNOBYL, EIGHT-YEAR-OLD BOGDAN
VETROV SUFFERS FROM AN ENLARGED
THYROID GLAND.
HIS MOTHER, VIKTORIA, BELIEVES
IT IS DUE TO RADIATION FOUND IN
THEIR FOOD, BUT SHE SAYS HER
FAMILY'S OPTIONS ARE: EAT FOOD
THAT MAY BE CONTAMINATED OR
STARVE.
>> (translated): "WE ARE AWARE
OF THE DANGERS, BUT WHAT CAN WE
DO?
THERE IS NO OTHER WAY TO SURVIVE
HERE.
ESPECIALLY IN THIS REGION WE
JUST CANNOT SURVIVE."
>> Reporter: VETROV AND HIS
SIBLINGS ARE AMONG 350-THOUSAND
CHILDREN LIVING IN AREAS WHERE
MONITORING RADIATION IN THE SOIL
ENDED FOUR YEARS AGO.
GREENPEACE, THE EUROPEAN UNION,
AND THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION HAVE FOUND LINKS
BETWEEN CONTAMINATED PRODUCE AND
MILK AND INCREASED LEVELS OF
THYROID CANCER.
ONE E.U. STUDY TRACKED 4,000
CHILDREN FOR THREE YEARS AND
FOUND MORE THAN 80 PERCENT OF
THEM HAD CARDIOVASCULAR ISSUES.
DOCTORS WHO PERFORM ANNUAL
CHECKS ON CHILDREN HERE HAVE
SEEN THAT FIRST-HAND.
>> (translated): "THERE ARE
VERY SERIOUS PATHOLOGICAL
PROCESSES, WHICH DEFINITELY WILL
UNFORTUNATELY HAVE NEGATIVE
CONSEQUENCES ON THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THESE CHILDREN."
>> Thompson: AND FINALLY, A
PLANE THAT RUNS ON SOLAR POWER
COMPLETED A RISKY PART OF ITS
JOURNEY AROUND THE WORLD.
THE PILOT LANDED THE SOLAR
IMPULSE 2 IN NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA LAST NIGHT AFTER A
THREE-DAY, 62-HOUR NONSTOP
FLIGHT ACROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN
FROM HAWAII.
THE PLANE IS POWERED BY 17,000
SOLAR CELLS EMBEDDED IN ITS
WINGS WHICH ARE AS WIDE AS A
747'S.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR A
REPORT ON REBUILDING NEPAL ONE
YEAR AFTER A DEVASTATING
EARTHQUAKE SHOOK THE COUNTRY.
AND THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
GOOD NIGHT.